---
layout: post
title:  
date:   2022-11-28 11:33:00
description: analysis of foundational concepts from first chapter of the self-paced “Certified in Cybersecurity” training, focusing on CIA.
tags: ['ISC2', 'CC', 'Concepts', 'CIA']
category: ['Cybersecurity-Certification-Content']
---

# teste

~~~ php
<?php

require 'flag.php';

$input = $_GET['token'];
$input = str_replace(array("\n", "\0"), '', $input);

function generate_token(){
    
    $recoveryId = stroupper(md5(uniqid('', true)));
    $recoveryId = substr(chunk_split($recoveryId, 8, '-'), -7, 18);

    if (isset($input) && $input === $recoveryId){
        load_admin_interface();
    }else{
        header("location: login.php");
    }
}

generate_token();
~~~

This is a PHP script that is used to authenticate a user. The script accepts a user-supplied input through the $_GET['token'] parameter and then compares it to a generated token to determine if the user should be granted access. The generated token is created using the generate_token() function, which calculates a random string using the uniqid() function and the md5() hash function, and then applies some string manipulation to create the final token. If the user-supplied input matches the generated token, the user is granted access to the load_admin_interface() function. If the user-supplied input does not match the generated token, the user is redirected to the login.php page.

From an application security perspective, there are several potential vulnerabilities in this code. Some of the more notable vulnerabilities include:

The use of the $_GET parameter to accept user input is potentially dangerous, since this allows users to supply arbitrary input through the URL. This could allow an attacker to manipulate the input to the script in order to bypass the authentication mechanism.
The use of the str_replace() function to strip newline and null characters from the user-supplied input is not sufficient to prevent an attacker from manipulating the input. An attacker could still supply other special characters that could be used to bypass the authentication mechanism.
The use of the stroupper() function is potentially dangerous, since this function is not actually a built-in PHP function. It is likely that this function is intended to be the strtoupper() function, but if it is not defined elsewhere in the code, it will generate an error.
The use of the substr() and chunk_split() functions to manipulate the generated token is potentially confusing and difficult to maintain. This could make the code more difficult to understand and debug, and could potentially introduce security vulnerabilities if the code is not carefully reviewed and tested.
Overall, this code has several potential vulnerabilities that could be exploited by an attacker to bypass the authentication mechanism and gain access to the protected load_admin_interface() function. It would be advisable to review and improve this code in order to make it more secure.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


From an application security perspective, the code could be corrected as follows:

Copy code
<?php

require 'flag.php';

// Use the $_POST parameter instead of the $_GET parameter
// to accept user input, since this is more secure
$input = $_POST['token'];

// Use the filter_var() function with the FILTER_SANITIZE_STRING
// flag to remove any special characters from the user-supplied
// input that could be used to manipulate the authentication
// mechanism
$input = filter_var($input, FILTER_SANITIZE_STRING);

function generate_token(){
    
    // Use the password_hash() function to create a
    // cryptographically secure hash of the random
    // string, rather than using the md5() function
    $recoveryId = password_hash(uniqid('', true), PASSWORD_DEFAULT);

    // Use the substr() function to extract the first 8
    // characters of the hash as the token
    $recoveryId = substr($recoveryId, 0, 8);

    if (isset($input) && password_verify($input, $recoveryId)){
        load_admin_interface();
    }else{
        header("location: login.php");
    }
}

generate_token(); ?>
In this revised code, the user-supplied input is accepted using the $_POST parameter instead of the $_GET parameter, which is more secure. The input is then sanitized using the filter_var() function to remove any special characters that could be used to manipulate the authentication mechanism. The generated token is created using the password_hash() function, which creates a cryptographically secure hash of the random string generated by the uniqid() function. The first 8 characters of the hash are used as the token, and the password_verify() function is used to compare the user-supplied input to the generated token. This approach is more secure and less susceptible to manipulation by an attacker.