---
layout: post
title:  THM AoC 2022 DAY 4
date:   2023-01-18 12:00:00
description: walking through the fourth day's topics and diving deeper
tags: ["scanning"]
category: ["try-hack-me", "thm-aoc-2022"]
---
## Introduction

Day three was based on osint techniques and it was focused on gathering sensitive information about business, people, location, repositories, infrastructure and so on. All that process is related to the reconnaissance phase, which is the first phase of an attack. This phase covers from gather information passively (for instance, information about the victim's organization, physical location(s), business relationships, send phishing messages to elicit sensitive information, search social media, search DNS data) to active scanning (IP blocks, vulnerabilities, iteratively probe infrastructure using brute-forcing and crawling techniques).

> Reconnaissance consists of techniques that involve adversaries actively or passively gathering information that can be used to support targeting

The current day still in reconnaissance phase, but now it is focused on in a more restrictive perimeter around network, operation system and applications. There are two main tactics related to this step, which are scanning and enumeration.

> Scanning includes ping sweeping, port scanning, and vulnerability scanning. Enumeration is the process of extracting meaningful information from the openings and information you found
during scanning, such as usernames, share data, group information, and much more

Thus, the fourth day is a red day, it is focused on scanning network techniques and tools. The main objectives are:

* to understand what is scanning;
* to distinguish between the various scanning types;
* to distinguish between the various scanning techniques;
* to know about scanning tools;

## What is scanning?

The process of gathering information creates an attack surface, outlining a collection of potential security risk exposures. From a cybersecurity perspective, this process involves mapping out which parts of a system require review and testing for vulnerabilities. One technique for achieving this is scanning, which involves identifying live hosts, ports, and services, determining the target system's operating system, and identifying vulnerabilities and threats within the network.

> They are typically automated and give an insight into what could be exploited. Scanning reveals parts of the attack surface for attackers and allows launching targeted attacks to exploit the system.

## Scanning types

There are two types of scanning: passive and active. Passive one has a more broad meaning, not targeting any specific device, service or port. On the other hand, active one is intentionally targeting in order to enumerate the possibility of a vulnerability existing. 

> In passive scanning you are watching from afar or checking publicly available information. Unlike, active scanning requires you to make some kind of contact with your target

Sum up some features of each type, we have:

* **passive**
  * no interaction with the network targets;
  * it avoids detection and it reduces risks of disrupting critical processes by interacting directly with endpoints;
  * captured packet analysis;
  * it does not generate additional network traffic;
  * it does not need scanning windows; 
  * it can be a continuous process; 
  * it requires more time to gather asset data;
  * it can build a model of active hosts, their services and applications.
* **active**
  * interaction with the network endpoint targets;
  * it is susceptible to detection and it highs risks of disrupting critical processes by interacting directly with endpoints because it is a type that needs interaction with endpoints;
  * captured packet analysis, but from target endpoints;
  * it generates additional network traffic;
  * it needs scanning windows;
  * it is a discontinuous process
  * eventually it can be faster than passive type just because it has a target;
  * it can get detailed information about a target such as device name, IP address, NetFlow or Syslog data, as well as more detailed configuration information such as make and model, firmware versions, installed software/versions and operating system patch levels;
  
## Scanning Techniques

Next it is described three techniques of scanning: network, port, vulnerability. Network scanning has a broader perspective, in contrast vulnerability is narrower in its approach. Each of these scans can be used effectively on their own but the true power of each really comes on strong when they are combined.

> Each scan type is like a piece of a larger puzzle that can be assembled to gain a clearer view of the overall target

Through scanning process, some meaningful information must be gathered, such as:

* ip addresses, including not just computers, but tablets, cell phones, printers, wireless access points and so forth;
* mac addresses;
* list of open and closed ports;
* operating system version;
* service information;

> You should expect any data that you collect during this phase to be plentiful and probably requiring a fair or lengthy amount of time to dissect and evaluate.


### network scanning

Network scanning attempts to identify active hosts or check whether information about network, if you were fortunate enough to uncover IP ranges in your intelligence-gathering phase.

> Network scanning helps to discover and map a complete network ip addresses 

A ping sweep, or icmp scans, technique is part of network scanning and it is focused on searching subnet or list of ip addresses with the intention of identifying which addresses have a system that is powered on behind it.

The classic and popular tool that is used to test the reachability of a host on an internet protocol network is `ping` tool, and it is one of the simplest one to check for live systems.

> Pinging is the process of using the `ping` command to ascertain the status of a given system, specifically whether it is responsive.

Ping is a tool that is used to handle icmp, which is stand for internet control message protocol, and it is a supporting protocol that is used by network devices to send error messages and operational information in the internet protocol suite, and by diagnostic tools such as `ping` and `traceroute`. ICMP is a network layer protocol, there's no tcp or udp port number related to icmp packets, and it was not designed to exchange data, differing from transport protocols.

> ICMP uses the basic support of ip as if it were a higher level protocol, however, icmp is actually an integral part of ip, and must be implemented by every ip module. The internet protocol is not designed to be absolutely reliable. The purpose of these control messages is to provide feedback about problems in the communication environment, not to make ip reliable.

#### ICMP v4

As the name suggest, icmp v4 is the version of protocol for ipv4. ICMP messages are sent using the basic IP header, inside the data portion of the datagram. All icmp packets have an 8-byte header, 64 bits. The first byte of that portion defines the icmp type field, which is known as message type. The messages available are:

* 0  Echo Reply;
* 3  Destination Unreachable;
* 4  Source Quench;
* 5  Redirect;
* 8  Echo;
* 11  Time Exceeded;
* 12  Parameter Problem;
* 13  Timestamp;
* 14  Timestamp Reply;
* 15  Information Request;
* 16  Information Reply.

And the next 8 bits define the code field, that the meaning changes related to the type field. Then, 16-bit field for checksum, and 32-bit field for *rest of header*.

Considering network scanning, 11 code will occurs when the ttl field reaches a value of zero. But the basis of networking discover is 8 and 0 messages. 8 echo message is used to discover if a host is live. In the case of the host is live, then it returns 0 echo reply. Beyond that ideal scenario, the reply will indicate that the destination or service is unreachable, 3 destination unreachable. According to RFC, there are six possible codes, they are:

* 0 = net unreachable;
* 1 = host unreachable;
* 2 = protocol unreachable;
* 3 = port unreachable;
* 4 = fragmentation needed and DF set;
* 5 = source route failed.

In the case of a ping request, 0 indicates that no route at all to destination, and 1 indicates that there is a route, but the host is unreachable. 

#### ICMP v6

ICMP v6 is the implementation of the icmp for ipv6 and it is used to perform error reporting and diagnostic functions. As v4, v6 message uses the header of ip for send message, inside the data portion of datagram, and the header of icmp has 32 bits, divided into three fields: type and code, 8 bits each, and checksum.

ICMP v6 enlarges the list of control messages, including messages of ip discover such as router solicitation and advertisement, and neighbor solicitation and advertisement.

### port scanning

Port scanning is a narrower approach because it targets an individual ip address and seeks to identify the ports that are open and closed, and as result it discovers services that are running behind open ports and that can be exploited later. There are three basic knowledge in this technique: how to detect the state of a port (open or close), how ports are distributed, and what service may be running in each port.

In computer networking, a port is an endpoint related to an ip, which means a socket (10.0.0.10:80, for instance) in a network that directs data to a specific service. From the operating system perspective, a port is a logical construction such as a mailbox related to transport protocol (tcp, udp). An application can handle tcp and udp connections during execution, each connection will be bind to a port, forming with ip and port. Each port can operate as udp and tcp at a time.

A port is a 16-bit number, ranging from 0 to 65535. And, according to IANA, are divided into three groups: 

* 0 to 1023 are system ports;
* 1024 to 49151 are user ports;
* 49152 to 65535 are dynamic ports.

**0 to 1023** are well-known ports in which system processes are running. In unix-like system, a process must execute with superuser privileges to be able to bind a network socket to an IP address using one of the well-known ports.

| port | service  |
|:----:|:--------:|
|20    |file transfer protocol (ftp) data transfer|
|21    |file transfer protocol (ftp) control command|
|22    |secure shell (ssh)|
|23    |telnet: unencrypted text communication|
|25    |simple mail transfer protocol (smtp), used for email routing between mail servers|
|43    |whois protocol|
|53    |domain name system (dns)|
|67    |dynamic host configuration protocol (dhcp) and bootstrap protocol (bootp) server|
|68    |dynamic host configuration protocol (dhcp) and bootstrap protocol (bootp) server|
|69    |trivial file transfer protocol (tftp)|
|80    |hypertext transfer protocol (http) uses tcp in versions 1.x and 2. http/3 uses quic|
|88    | kerberos|
|109   |post office protocol, version 2 (pop2)|
|110   |post office protocol, version 3 (pop3)|
|123   |network time protocol (ntp), used for time synchronization|
|135   |rpc-dcom|
|139   |smb|
|143   |imap|
|161   |simple network management protocol (snmp)|
|162   |simple network management protocol trap (snmptrap)|
|194   |internet relay chat (irc)|
|220   |internet message access protocol (imap)|
|389   |lightweight directory access protocol (ldap)|
|443   |hypertext transfer protocol secure (https) uses tcp in versions 1.x and 2. http/3 uses quic|
|500   |internet security association and key management protocol (isakmp) / internet key exchange (ike)|
|514   |syslog|
|520   |routing information protocol (rip)|
|521   |routing information protocol next generation (ripng)|
|530   |remote procedure call (rpc)|
|546|			dhcpv6 client|
|547|			dhcpv6 server|
|587	|email message submission (smtp)|
|593    |	http rpc, remote procedure call over hypertext transfer protocol|
|636	| lightweight directory access protocol over tls/ssl (ldaps)|
|647	| dhcp failover protocol|
|853	| dns over tls (rfc 7858) / dns over quic or dns over dtls|
|989	| ftps protocol (data), ftp over tls/ssl|
|990	| ftps protocol (control), ftp over tls/ssl|
|992	|telnet protocol over tls/ssl|
|993	|internet message access protocol over tls/ssl (imaps)|
|995	|post office protocol 3 over tls/ssl (pop3s)|

<br>
**1024 to 49151** are the registered ports, which means ports that are used by specific services upon application. On most systems, registered ports can be used without superuser privileges.

| port | service  |
|:----:|:--------:|
|1080| socks5|
|1194	|			openvpn|
|1241	|			nessus security scanner|
|1270	|			microsoft system center operations manager (scom) (formerly microsoft operations manager (mom)) agent|
|1293|internet protocol security (ipsec)|
|1433	|microsoft sql server database management system (mssql) server|
|1434	|microsoft sql server database management system (mssql) monitor|
|1494|Citrix Applications|
|1521 |	oracle database default listener|
|1527 | oracle net services, formerly known as sql*net; apache derby network server|
|1801	|			microsoft message queuing|
|2181 | 	apache zookeeper default client port|
|2375	|			docker rest api (plain)|
|2376	|			docker rest api (ssl)|
|2377	|			docker swarm cluster management communications|
|2483	|			oracle database listening for insecure client connections to the listener, replaces port 1521|
|2484	|			oracle database listening for ssl client connections to the listener|
|2512|citrix management|
|2513|citrix management|
|2598|Citrix Applications|
|3000	| ruby on rails development default; meteor development default; resilio sync; spun from bittorrent sync.; create react app, script to create single-page react applications; gogs (self-hosted git service); 	grafana|
|3306	|	mysql database system|
|3389	|			microsoft terminal server (rdp) officially registered as windows based terminal (wbt);
|3872	|				oracle enterprise manager remote agent|
|4243	| docker implementations, redistributions, and setups default|
|4444 | metasploit's default listener port|
|4500	|	ipsec nat traversal (rfc 3947, rfc 4306)|
|5000 |asp.net core — development webserver; flask development webserver; docker registry|
|5022	|				mssql server replication and database mirroring endpoints|
|5432	|			postgresql database system|
|5500 |vnc remote frame buffer rfb protocol—for incoming listening viewer|
|5601	|			kibana|
|5800 | vnc remote frame buffer rfb protocol over http|
|5900 |virtual network computing (vnc) remote frame buffer rfb protocol|
|5938	|			teamviewer remote desktop protocol;
|6000–6063	|			x11—used between an x client and server over the network|
|6443	|				kubernetes api server|
|6660–6664	|				internet relay chat (irc)|
|6665–6669	|				internet relay chat (irc)|
|6679	|internet relay chat (irc) ssl (secure internet relay chat)—often used|
|6697	|				irc ssl (secure internet relay chat)—often used|
|6771	|	bittorrent local peer discovery|
|6881–6887	|			bittorrent beginning of range of ports used most often|
|6888	|		bittorrent continuation of range of ports used most often|
|6889–6890	| bittorrent continuation of range of ports used most often|
|6891–6900	|			bittorrent continuation of range of ports used most often|
|6901	|			windows live messenger (voice); bittorrent continuation of range of ports used most often|
|6902–6968	| bittorrent continuation of range of ports used most often|
|6969	|			bittorrent tracker|
|6970–6999	|			bittorrent end of range of ports used most often|
|7946				|docker swarm communication among nodes|
|8000 | dynamodb local; django development webserver; python 3 http.server;| 
|8005 | tomcat remote shutdown|
|8008 | alternative port for http. see also ports 80 and 8080|
|8009	|	apache jserv protocol|
|8080 | alternative port for http. see also ports 80 and 8008; apache tomcat;
|8088	|	asterisk management access via http|
|8089 | 	splunk daemon management|
|8139	|		puppet (software) client agent|
|8140	|	puppet (software) master server|
|8243	| https listener for apache synapse|
|8280	|	http listener for apache synapse|
|8530	| windows server update services over http, when using the default role installation settings in windows server 2012 and later versions|
|8531	| windows server update services over https, when using the default role installation settings in windows server 2012 and later versions|
|8983	|		apache solr|
|9000 | sonarqube web server; hadoop namenode default port|
|9001 | microsoft sharepoint authoring environment; tor network default|
|9006 | tomcat in standalone mode|
|9030	|				tor often used;
|9042	|				apache cassandra native protocol clients;
|9050–9051 | 	tor (socks-5 proxy client)|
|9092 | apache kafka a distributed streaming platform|
|9150| 	tor browser|
|9200	|elasticsearch—default elasticsearch port|
|9392	| openvas greenbone security assistant web interface|
|9418	|git, git pack transfer service|
|9997	| splunk port for communication between the forwarders and indexers|
|9999	|	dash (cryptocurrency)|
|15672	|rabbitmq management plugin|
|18080	|monero p2p network communications|
|18081	|monero incoming rpc calls|
|18333	|bitcoin testnet|
|23399	     | skype default protocol|
|25734-25735 | solidworks solidnetworklicense |
|27017	     | mongodb daemon process (mongod) and routing service (mongos)|
|31337       | ncat, a netcat alternative|
|32976	     | logmein hamachi, a vpn application; also tcp port 12975 and ssl (tcp 443)|
|33848	     |jenkins, a continuous integration (ci) tool|
|42806       |discord|

<br>
**49152–65535** are dynamic or private ports that cannot be registered with IANA. This range is used for private or customized services, for temporary purposes, and for automatic allocation of ephemeral ports, and are typically used by tcp and udp for a client-end of a client-service communication. At the server end of the communication session, ephemeral ports may also be used for continuation of communications with a client that initially connected to one of the services listening with a well-known port.

In a wide perspective, port scanning sends a message to each port, one at a time. For a known port, such as 80, which is known that a web server is running behind, a port scanner tool was developed to use tcp protocol and http, for it is the default mode to communicate with http server. In the case of an unknown port, the scanner tool tests from a range of options a transport protocol (tcp or udp) and an application protocol. Even though there is a range of options, when the scanner goes beyond port 1023, the process become slower. And even when a http server is detected behind port 80, other issues come up, such as which is the server running, which version. Which is the OS behind? 

Here, we go beyond port scanning and step in the enumeration technique, which aims to identify server, version, os, and so on. For that, fingerprint analysis is a common technique that attempts to identify any information from the responses that can be used to indicate origin or responsibility. This analysis is broken up into two subprocess: gathering and classification of fingerprints, and comparison of unknown fingerprints with he stored database of known fingerprints.

During the first phase, the key is to gather meaningful information, which identifies service or operation system. In the case of OS, some details of TCP/IP stack allow to differentiate between windows-like and unix-line operating system. The same for http servers. Even though the http protocol is the same for all http servers, some detail in the response of server can be used to identify, for example, the server banner. But just that information is not 100% trustworthy because the administrator can disable the banner or even change the information.

### vulnerability scanning

After identifying the service and operation system that are running behind a socket (ip:port), it is time to seek for vulnerabilities, that helps determine whether the system may be threatened or exploited.

When we talk about service or operation system vulnerabilities, we talk about software vulnerabilities, or even vulnerabilities that come up from the interaction of software systems. Less common, but possible is hardware vulnerabilities.

In the case of software vulnerabilities, which is our focus here, it is an ongoing problem that can be mitigated, but constant reassessment needs to be done. A software vulnerability can be introduced by different sources: a design flaw, source code mistake, misconfiguration. In software industry, there are standards and guidelines that help to become awareness about the most critical security risks in the process of software development, two of them are owasp and cwe.

**CWE** ranks based on data from common vulnerabilities and exposures (cve's), and for its turn, cve is a list of publicly disclosed computer security flaws. Then, those vulnerabilities are indexed according to a taxonomy (pillar weakness, class weakness, base weakness, variant weakness) of vulnerabilities from an abstract concept base (base weakness) to specific vulnerability (variant weakness). All this interplay of vulnerabilities creates a language by which it is possible to analyze and describe them.

> the main goal of CWE is to stop vulnerabilities at the source by educating software and hardware architects, designers, programmers, and acquirers on how to eliminate the most common mistakes before products are delivered

Just for illustrate, top 3 cwe out of 25 in 2022 were:

* CWE-787 - Out-of-bounds Write
*  CWE-79 - Improper Neutralization of Input During Web Page Generation ('Cross-site Scripting')
*  CWE-89 - Improper Neutralization of Special Elements used in an SQL Command ('SQL Injection')

**OWASP Top 10** is based on data from contributions of appsec researches, community survey, development experts. Then, after a process of analysis and categorizing, using cwe's, the categories are defined based on root causes more than symptom.

The top 3 owasp out of 10 in 2021 were:

* A01:2021-Broken Access Control
* A02:2021-Cryptographic Failures
* A03:2021-Injection

OWASP is a huge non profit foundation that aims to improve the security of software, working on hundred projects, some of them are:

* OWASP Amass
* OWASP Application Security Verification Standard
* OWASP Cheat Sheet Series
* OWASP CSRFGuard
* OWASP CycloneDX
* OWASP Defectdojo
* OWASP Dependency-Check
* OWASP Dependency-Track
* OWASP Juice Shop
* OWASP Mobile Application Security
* OWASP ModSecurity Core Rule Set
* OWASP OWTF
* OWASP SAMM
* OWASP Security Knowledge Framework
* OWASP Security Shepherd
* OWASP Top Ten
* OWASP Web Security Testing Guide
* OWASP ZAP

On the basis of cwe, owasp and other standards is cve's. Common vulnerabilities and exposures is a catalog of a brief description of a vulnerability that is submitted by organization and members of the open source community. CVE list gives a reliable way to recognize unique vulnerabilities and coordinate the development of security tools and solutions. Other databases, such as nvd.nist.gov and kb.cert.org are responsible beyond other things to detail the vulnerabilities that come up in cve list.

## Scanning Tools

### zap

OWASP Zed Attack Proxy (ZAP) is designed specifically for testing web applications as a "man-in-the-middle proxy", intercepting and inspecting messages sent between browser and application, modifying the content if needed, and forwarding those packets on to the destination. The easiest way to start using ZAP is running an automate test. This test is divided into some steps as follow:

* crawl the web application with its spider and passively scan each page it finds;
* active scanning to attack all of the discovered pages, functionality, and parameters;

This test is based on owasp top ten, each group of vulnerabilities will be test following rules that are described in zapping the owasp top 10 (2021) page.

## References

Oriyano, S. (2016). Penetration Testing Essentials (1st ed.). Sybex.

R., F. K., & Richard, S. W. (2011). TCP/IP Illustrated: The Protocols, Volume 1 (Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series) (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional.

### THM references

[adventofcyber4](https://tryhackme.com/room/adventofcyber4){:target="_blank"}.

[furthernmap](https://tryhackme.com/room/furthernmap){:target="_blank"}.

[Nmap Live Host Discovery](https://tryhackme.com/room/nmap01){:target="_blank"}.

[Nmap Basic Port Scans](https://tryhackme.com/room/nmap02){:target="_blank"}.

[Nmap Advanced Port Scans](https://tryhackme.com/room/nmap03){:target="_blank"}.

[Nmap Post Port Scans](https://tryhackme.com/room/nmap04){:target="_blank"}.

[passiverecon](https://tryhackme.com/room/passiverecon){:target="_blank"}.

[activerecon](https://tryhackme.com/room/activerecon){:target="_blank"}.

### other references

[attack.mitre: ta0043 - reconnaissance tactic](https://attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0043/){:target="_blank"}.

[cheatsheetseries.owasp.org: attack_surface_analysis_cheat_sheet](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Attack_Surface_Analysis_Cheat_Sheet.html){:target="_blank"}.

[thecyberbasics.medium.com: active-vs-passive-network-scanning-2466f62639d1](https://thecyberbasics.medium.com/active-vs-passive-network-scanning-2466f62639d1){:target="_blank"}.

[infosecurity-magazine.com: active-passive-scanning](https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/opinions/active-passive-scanning/){:target="_blank"}.

[reciprocity.com: vulnerability-scanners-passive-scanning-vs-active-scanning](https://reciprocity.com/blog/vulnerability-scanners-passive-scanning-vs-active-scanning/){:target="_blank"}.

[edureka: network-scanning-kali-ethical-hacking](https://www.edureka.co/blog/network-scanning-kali-ethical-hacking/){:target="_blank"}.

[rfc792: internet control message protocol](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc792){:target="_blank"}.

[rfc4443: internet control message protocol (icmpv6) for the internet protocol version 6 (ipv6) specification](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4443){:target="_blank"}.

[rfc9293: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9293){:target="_blank"}.

[rfc6335: internet assigned numbers authority (iana) procedures for the management of the service name and transport protocol port number registry](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6335){:target="_blank"}.

[en.wikipedia.org: ping_(networking_utility)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ping_(networking_utility)){:target="_blank"}.

[en.wikipedia.org: internet_control_message_protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Control_Message_Protocol){:target="_blank"}.

[2022_cwe_top25](https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2022/2022_cwe_top25.html){:target="_blank"}.

[nvd.nist.gov](https://nvd.nist.gov/){:target="_blank"}.

[known-exploited-vulnerabilities-catalog](https://www.cisa.gov/known-exploited-vulnerabilities-catalog){:target="_blank"}.

[cve.mitre.org](https://cve.mitre.org/index.html){:target="_blank"}.

[www-project-top-ten](https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/){:target="_blank"}.

[nvd.nist.gov/](https://nvd.nist.gov/){:target="_blank"}.

[kb.cert.org: vuls](https://www.kb.cert.org/vuls/){:target="_blank"}.

[zaproxy.org: zapping-the-top-10-2021](https://www.zaproxy.org/docs/guides/zapping-the-top-10-2021/){:target="_blank"}.