---
layout: post
title:  THM AoC 2022 DAY THREE
date:   2023-01-02 14:00:00
description: walking through the third day's topics and diving deeper
tags: ["osint", "google-dorks", "github-dorks", "robots.txt", "whois-lookup", "exposed-data"]
category: ["try-hack-me", "thm-aoc-2022"]
---
## Introduction

the third day focuses on osint and the goals are:

* what is osint, and what techniques can extract useful information against a website or target?
* using dorks to find specific information on the google search engine
* extracting hidden directories through the robots.txt file
* domain owner information through whois lookup
* searching data from hacked databases
* acquiring sensitive information from publicly available github repositories

Open Source Intelligence refers to the process of collecting, analyzing, and disseminating information that is publicly available and legally obtainable, such as internet (social media, websites, online databases), mass media, specialist journals and research, photos, and geospatial information. OSINT can be a valuable tool for gathering information about people, organizations, and events, as well as for detecting and mitigating potential threats.

There are many techniques that can be used to extract useful information from websites or other online sources as part of an osint investigation. Some common techniques include:

* **search engine queries**: using search engines like google, bing, or yahoo to find information about a target or website can be a useful first step in an osint investigation. By using specific search terms and operators, you can narrow down your results and find relevant information more quickly;
* **social media searches**: many people share information about themselves and their activities on social media platforms, making these platforms a valuable source of information for osint investigations. By searching for a target's username or other identifying information, you can find profiles and posts that may provide useful information;
* **website analysis**: examining a website's structure, content, and metadata can also provide valuable information. Tools like whois, which allows you to look up information about a domain's registration and ownership, can be particularly useful in this regard;
* **data mining**: extracting and analyzing data from a variety of sources, such as public databases or online marketplaces, can also be a useful technique for gathering information as part of an osint investigation;
* **physical observations**: in some cases, it may be possible to gather information about a target by physically observing their activities or surroundings. For example, you might take photographs of a target's property or look for clues about their habits or interests;

## Google Dorks

Google dorking is an osint technique that is used to find specific, vulnerable or useful information on the internet using advanced google search operators and queries. These queries are typically constructed to target specific websites that contain the desired information, and they often use advanced search operators such as `filetype`, `inurl`, `intext`, and `site` to narrow down the search results.

Google dorking can be used for a variety of purposes, including finding vulnerabilities in websites, locating sensitive information that has been accidentally or intentionally made public, and uncovering hidden pages or functionality on websites. It is important to note that google dorking can also be used for malicious purposes, such as accessing sensitive information or compromising the security of websites and systems.

### Basic concepts of google search

First rule says that google reserves the right to ignore what you input as search phrase, including words, characters, and single digits. Asterisk wildcard is used to represent nothing more that a single word in a search phrase and it is useful to reduce the length of a search. Consider, for instance, the phrase “We the people of the United States in order to form a more perfect union establish justice”. It has seventeen words long, and if we replace some of the words with the asterisk and submit it as “we * people * * united states * order * form * more perfect * establish *”, including the quote, google sees this as a nine-word query with eight uncounted wildcard characters. By the way, google limits searches up to 32 words, including search terms as well as advanced operators and to get beyond that limit you can use the above technique. Last but not least, google are not case sensitive. In summary:

> common words, characters, single digits can be ignored by google

> not case sensitive, except 'OR', which is a boolean operator

> asterisk represents nothing more than a word and it can be used to replace some of them when bypassing the limit of 32 words

About search itself, there are two basic ways. One of them is a simplest query compounded by a single word or a combination of individual words, such as `passwords`, `password admin`. The other one is slightly more complex, a phrase is a group of words enclosed in double-quote marks. When Google encounters a phrase, it searches for all words in that phrase in the exact order you provide them. Google does not exclude common words found in a phrase. A phrase example is `"password admin"`.

Google search allows boolean operators (`+`, `|`, `-`), parenthesis and special characters. To perform advanced queries, it is important understand the boolean operators and properly segment the various parts of an advanced query using grouping techniques with parenthesis characters. Finally, we will combine these techniques with certain special characters that may serve as shorthand for certain operators, wildcard characters, or placeholders.

* `+` is boolean `AND` operator and it forces the inclusion of the word that follows it, without space. Consider, for instance, to search for `“and,” “justice,” “for,” and “all”` as separate, distinct words. In that way, google will exclude common words. To perform this search with the inclusion of all words, consider a query such as `"+and justice for +all"` with double quotes.
* `-` is boolean `NOT` operator that excludes a word from a search, prefacing the word without space.
* `|` is boolean `OR` operator and it is a less common and sometimes more confusing boolean operator. It instructs google to locate either one term or another in a query.

Consider this example: `intext:password | passcode intext:username | userid | user filetype:csv`. This is to find pages that have either password or passcode in text document, showing only pages that contain either words username, userid, or user. Another way to express that expression is `intext:(password | passcode) intext:(username | userid | user) filetype:csv`. Search reduction is a technique used to focus the search results on a specific subset of information or websites, which can be helpful when trying to find specific types of information or websites that may be buried among a large number of search results.

Working with urls could be a useful technique because google query is represented with a url that points to a result page, which is not static, but it is dynamic and it is created on fly. For that, url becomes a nice, compact sort of shorthand to handle with google query.

### Advanced Operators

Advanced operators are special commands that can be used in google search queries to filter and refine the search results. They can help you get to exactly the information you’re looking for without spending too much time poring over page after page of search results. When advanced operators are not provided in a query, google will locate your search terms in any area of the Web page, including the title, the text, the uniform resource locator (url).

* `intitle` is used to locate text in the top of the page in title region, which is in general defined by `title` html tag, but not only. Just the next phrase is considered, the other phrases are not considered in the advanced operator. For instance, `intitle:"IIS Windows Server"`;
* `allintitle` is the advanced operator to search more then one phrase, locating them in the title region. For instance, `allintitle:index of "/icewarp"`, `allintitle:"CrushFTP WebInterface"`;

> `allintitle` is a more restrictive operator and it tends to be clumsy when it's used with other advanced operators and tends to break the query entirely, causing it to return no results. It’s better to go overboard and use a bunch of `intitle` operators in a query rather than using `allintitle` operators

* `allintext` is the simplest operator to use since it performs the function that search engines are most known for: locating a term within the text of the page. Since this operator starts with the word all, every search term provided after the operator is considered part of the operator’s search query. For instance, `allintext"account number"`;

> Using `allintext` can also serve as a type of shorthand for “find this string anywhere except in the title, the URL, and links”

* `inurl` is an operator to find text in a url. As simple as the above operators, except it has some limitations. First, google can’t effectively search the protocol portion of the url – `http://`. Second, there are a ton of special characters sprinkled around the url, which google also has trouble weeding through. Third, and most important, other advanced operators (`site` and `filetype`, for example) can search more specific places inside the URL even better than `inurl` can. These factors make `inurl` much trickier to use effectively than an `intitle` search, which is very simple by comparison. For instance, `inurl: /wp-includes/uploads`;
* `allinurl` operates like `inurl`, except for consider more than one word in search. For instance, `allinurl:"google faq"`;

> `allinurl` does not play very well with other queries. If you need to find several words or phrases in a url, it’s better to supply several `inurl` queries than to succumb to the rather unfriendly `allinurl` conventions

* `site` is the best way to search for address or domain name of a server. Site allows you to search only for pages that are hosted on a specific server or in a specific domain. For instance, `site:gitlab.* intext:password intext:@gmail.com | @yahoo.com | @hotmail.com`;
* `filetype` searches for pages that end in a particular file extension and can be mixed with other operators and search terms. For instance, `filetype:txt site:gitlab.* "secret" OR "authtoken"`;
* `link` searches for pages that link to other pages. The link operator can be extended to include not only basic urls, but complete urls that include directory names, filenames, parameters, and the like. Keep in mind that long URLs are much more specific and will return fewer results than their shorter counterparts. To properly use the link operator, you must provide a full URL (including protocol, server, directory, and file), a partial URL (including only the protocol and the host), or simply a server name. For instance, `link:http://www.toastforums.com/`;
* `inanchor` can be considered a companion to the `link` operator, since they both help search links. The `inanchor` operator, however, searches the text representation of a link, not the actual url. For instance, `restaurants inanchor:gourmet`; 
* `cache` is used to jump directly to the cached version of a page without performing a google query. The cache operator can be used with other operators and terms, although the results are somewhat unpredictable. For instance, `cache:google.com`;
* `numrange` can find numbers between a range, which follows a min and a max separated by a dash. This operator can be used with other operators and search terms. For instance, `intitle:"Biromsoft WebCam" -4.0 -serial -ask -crack -software -a -the -build -download -v4 -3.01 -numrange:1-10000`;
* `daterange` is used as two dates separates by a dash. The two dates must be in Julian format, which means the number of the day passed since January 1, 4713 B.C. For instance, `site:pastebin.com intext:@gmail.com | @yahoo.com | @hotmail.com daterange:2457388-2457491`;
* `info` shows the summary information for a site and provides links to other google searches that might pertain to the site.
* `related` displays sites that google has determined are related to a site.
* `stocks` allows you to search for stock market information about a particular company.
* `define` shows the definition of a term.

Some of above examples are from [google hacking database](https://www.exploit-db.com/google-hacking-database);

Considering advanced operators, keep in mind this:

> no space between operator, colon, search term. `intitle:Google`, `intitle:"index of"`

> search term can be a single word or a phrase surrounded by quotes

> boolean operators and special characters are allowed, but they don't get in the way of colon

> operators that start with all are oddballs, which means they are used once per query

## WHOIS Lookup

WHOIS is a query and response protocol that is used to query databases that store information about registered domain names, internet resources and also for a wider range of other information. It is a TCP-based transaction-oriented and it delivers its content in a human-readable format. In line with RFC 3912, a WHOIS client requests a TCP connection on port 43 of the server, the classic 3-way handshake (SYN/SYN-ACK/SYN) is established. Then, the client sends a query to server, which is a string that ends with <CR><LF> ASCII characters. The server responds with another string message, in which can contain many <CR><LF> sequences. When the message is finished, the server closes the TCP connection (FIN).

In general, those databases are publicly available allowing someone to get information about a company, like an email address, mobile number, technical contact. WHOIS lookup is a tool to perform that query and it can be used through browser (such as [who.is/](https://who.is/), [registro.br](https://registro.br/)) or command line (`whois`). To use `whois` command line, do not query a fully qualified domain name (FQDN), but it works only with a secondary domain names, such as `whois google.com` or ip address, such as `whois 216.58.206.46`.

WHOIS checks `/etc/whois.config` file, if it exists then it will be consulted to find a server before applying the normal rules.

Another category of tools that are useful for get information about domains are those that perform dns lookup. And among them there is `host` command line.

* To find domain ip address: `host google.com`;
* To find domain name servers: `host -t ns google.com`;
* To find domain cname record: `host -t cname mail.google.com`;
* To find domain mx record: `host -n -t mx google.com`;
* To find domain txt record: `host -t txt google.com`;
* To find all information: `host -a google.com`;

Another is `nslookup`, which is used to query internet domain name servers.

## Robots.txt

It is a text file that is placed in the root directory of a website. It tells web robots, or *crawlers*, which pages or files the robot is allowed to access. Crawlers are programs that automatically visit websites and retrieve information for search engines. They follow links from one page to another and index everything they find on their way. When a search engine like google needs to find information for a search query, it searches its index for the relevant pages and returns the results to the user. They are an essential part of how search engines work.

The `robots.txt` is not a mandatory file, and it is not a perfect solution for blocking web robots from accessing certain pages. The presence of the robots.txt does not in itself present any kind of security vulnerability, but from the bad actors perspective, that file could be a source of sensitive directories that can be manually accessed and exploited.

 The information in the file may therefore help an attacker to map out the site's contents, especially if some of the locations identified are not linked from elsewhere in the site.

## Breached Database Search

Because of data breaches in the past, to some extent leaked data is publicly available and it contains usernames, email address, mobile number and even passwords. 

## Searching GitHub Repos

It is the process of searching for sensitive information on the github platform. A common flaw by developers is that the privacy of the repository is set as public, which means anyone can access it. These repositories contain complete source code and, most of the time, include passwords, access tokens, etc.

Github allows to search across all of github, or when you have a repository in mind, navigate to it and then use the search bar to restrict the scope. Github search engine allows to search across repositories, topics, issues and pull requests, discussions, code, commits, users, packages, wikis.

Github docs highlights some considerations about code search:

* you must be signed into a personal account on github to search for code across all public repositories;
* code in forks is only searchable if the fork has more stars than the parent repository. forks with fewer stars than the parent repository are not indexed for code search. to include forks with more stars than their parent in the search results, you will need to add `fork:true` or `fork:only` to your query;
* only the default branch is indexed for code search;
* only files smaller than 384 kb are searchable;
* up to 4,000 private repositories are searchable. these 4,000 repositories will be the most recently updated of the first 10,000 private repositories that you have access to;
* only repositories with fewer than 500,000 files are searchable;
* only repositories that have had activity or have been returned in search results in the last year are searchable;
* except with `filename` searches, you must always include at least one search term when searching source code. For example, searching for `language:javascript` is not valid, while `amazing language:javascript` is.
* at most, search results can show two fragments from the same file, but there may be more results within the file;
* You can't use the following wildcard characters as part of your search query: <code>. , : ; / \ ` ' " = * ! ? # $ &amp; + ^ | ~ &lt; &gt; ( ) { } [ ] @</code>. The search will simply ignore these symbols;

As a common search engine there are some operators, as such:

* `>n` matches more than n. For instance, `cats stars:>1000`;
* `>=n` or `n..*` matche n or more than n. For instance, `cats topics:>=5`;
* `<n` matches smaller than n. For instance, `cats size:<10000`;
* `<=n` or `*..n` matche n or fewer than n. For instance, `cats stars:<=50`;
* `n..m` matches between n and m. For instance, `cats stars:10..50`;
* `>YYYY-MM-DD` or `YYYY-MM-DD..*` matche dates after date. For instance, `cats created:>2016-04-29`;
* `>=YYYY-MM-DD` matches dates on or after date. For instance, `cats created:>=2016-04-29`;
* `<YYYY-MM-DD` or `*..YYYY-MM-DD` matche dates before date. For instance, `cats created:<2016-04-29`;
* `<=YYYY-MM-DD` matches dates on or before date. For instance, `cats created:<=2016-04-29`;
* `YYYY-MM-DD..YYYY-MM-DD` matches dates between two dates. For instance, cats pushed:2016-04-30..2016-07-04;
* `THH:MM:SS+00:00` or `THH:MM:SSZ` add information about time in date operator. For instance, `cats created:2017-01-01T01:00:00+07:00..2017-03-01T15:30:15+07:00`, cats `created:2016-03-21T14:11:00Z..2016-04-07T20:45:00Z`;
* `NOT` is used to exclude a certain word from the result. For instance, `hello NOT world`;
* `-QUALIFIER` is used to exclude a certain subsets. For instance, `cats stars:>10 -language:javascript`;
* `""` is used for queries with whitespace. For instance, `cats NOT "hello world"`, `build label:"bug fix"`;

And some qualifies, as such:

* `in:file`, `in:path` restrict search to the contents of source file, file path, or both. When omitted, only the file contents are searched. For instance, `octocat in:file`, `octocat in:path`, `octocat in:file,path`;
* `user:USERNAME` searches by a certain user. For instance, `user:defunkt extension:rb`;
* `org:ORGNAME` searches by a certain organization. For instance, `org:github extension:js`;
* `repo:USERNAME/REPOSITORY` searches by a certain repository name. For instance, `repo:mozilla/shumway extension:as`;
* `path:/` is used to search for files that are located at the root level of a repository. For instance, `octocat filename:readme path:/`;
* `path:DIRECTORY`, `path:PATH/TO/DIRECTORY` searches files in a specific directory or subdirectories. For instance, `form path:cgi-bin language:perl`, `console path:app/public language:javascript`;
* `language:LANGUAGE` searches for code based on what language it's written in. A list of supported languages can be found [here](github/linguist repository). For instance, `element language:xml size:100`, `display language:scss`, `org:mozilla language:markdown`;
* `size:n` searches for source code based on the size of the file where the code exists. For instance, `function size:>10000 language:python`;
* `filename:FILENAME` matches code files with a certain filename. For instance, `filename:linguist`, `filename:.vimrc commands`, `filename:test_helper path:test language:ruby`;
* `extension:EXTENSION` matches code files with a certain file extension. For instance, `form path:cgi-bin extension:pm`, `icon size:>200000 extension:css`;

## References

Long, J., Gardner, B., & Brown, J. (2015). Google Hacking for Penetration Testers. Elsevier Gezondheidszorg.

### THM references

[Googledorking: Explaining how Search Engines work and leveraging them into finding hidden content!](https://tryhackme.com/room/googledorking){:target="_blank"}.

[Searchlight - IMINT: OSINT challenges in the imagery intelligence category](https://tryhackme.com/room/searchlightosint){:target="_blank"}.

[Sakura Room: Use a variety of OSINT techniques to solve this room created by the OSINT Dojo](https://tryhackme.com/room/sakura){:target="_blank"}.

[Geolocating Images: Room to understand how to geolocate images](https://tryhackme.com/room/geolocatingimages){:target="_blank"}.

[Shodan.io: Learn about Shodan.io and how to use it for devices enumeration - is your coffee machine publicly accessible?](https://tryhackme.com/room/shodan){:target="_blank"}.

[OhSINT: Are you able to use open source intelligence to solve this challenge?](https://tryhackme.com/room/ohsint){:target="_blank"}.

[WebOSINT: Conducting basic open source intelligence research on a website](https://tryhackme.com/room/webosint){:target="_blank"}.

[Threat Intelligence Tools: Explore different OSINT tools used to conduct security threat assessments and investigations.](https://tryhackme.com/room/threatinteltools){:target="_blank"}.

[KaffeeSec - SoMeSINT: An intro to SOCMINT (Social Media Intelligence/Investigation) techniques and tooling. Use your awesome OSINT skills to perform an online investigation of a mysterious husband!](https://tryhackme.com/room/somesint){:target="_blank"}.

### other references

[Google-hacking-database](https://www.exploit-db.com/google-hacking-database){:target="_blank"}.

[Google Search Basics](www.google.com/help/basics.html) 

[docs.github: understanding-the-search-syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/search-github/getting-started-with-searching-on-github/understanding-the-search-syntax){:target="_blank"}.

[docs.github: searching-code](https://docs.github.com/en/search-github/searching-on-github/searching-code){:target="_blank"}.

[docs.github: about-searching-on-github](https://docs.github.com/en/search-github/getting-started-with-searching-on-github/about-searching-on-github){:target="_blank"}.

[github: languages.yml](https://github.com/github/linguist/blob/master/lib/linguist/languages.yml){:target="_blank"}.

[book.hacktricks.xyz: github-leaked-secrets](https://book.hacktricks.xyz/generic-methodologies-and-resources/external-recon-methodology/github-leaked-secrets){:target="_blank"}.

[WHOIS Protocol Specification](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3912)

[Portswigger.net - robots-text-file](https://portswigger.net/kb/issues/00600600_robots-txt-file)

[Some online tools]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link _pages/links.md %}){:target="_blank"}.